NoTES. 45

70. nutu two] J anus bore a key as a symbol (ver. 99),
whence resera, to which is added the notion of favour
and good will. Candida probably alludes to the white
togas of the people keeping holiday.

71. linquisque—fcwetc] Cf. Hor. Carm. iii. 1. 2.

74. livida turba] Α ‘ Envious (or slanderous) crowd.'
Some editions have linqua.

76a.] This expression, which is not an obvious one,
was probably borrowed from Propertius, v. (iv.) (3, 74,
‘ terque lavet nostra spica Cilissa comas? Inf. v, 318.
Ibis, 202, ‘quotve ferat, dicam, terra Cilissa crocos.'
Saffron is meant, or the dried pistils of crocus· samus,
imported from Corycus in Cilicia. WVhen burnt on hot
embers it makes a crackling noise‚ which was considered
a good omen. Tibull. ii. 5, 81, ‘ laurus, io, bona signa
dedit ; gaudete coloni) Inf. 344 ; iv. 742.

7612. Cilissa] Fem. adj. ‚ ‘ Cilician‚' belonging to Cili-

- cia, in Asia Minor.

78. summa in aede] ‘ In the roof of the 'temple’

7922. intactis] ‘ Clean,’ newlv scoured, and unstained
by use since they left the hands of the fuller. So
‘lilium not tactum,’ Martial, V. 37. 6. Vestis is more
commonly used of the tunic than the toga. Sco on vi.
623. New togas may also be meant, for these were
frequently required in the city, though not in the coun-
try, where they were seldom worn. Martial x. 96. 11 1——

‘ Quatuor hic aestate togae pluresve teruntur :
Auctumnis ibi me quatuor una tegit,’

i.e. in Spain—Tarpeias arces, the temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus.--fest0 concolor. Dies atri (58) were con-

