102 P. ovmi NASONIS FASTORUM LIB 1.

689. pinguior aequo] Cf. iv. 644, ‘nunc ager assidua
luxuriabat aqua.’ Georg. i. 112, ‘luxuriem segetum
tenera depascit in herba.' Ibid. 154, ‘ infelix lolium
et steriles dominantur avenae. ‘⁸

693. passura bis ignem] viZ. both in the kiln and in
the baking. It is remarkable that the Romans treated
their bread-corn nearly as we treat malt,-—they dried
it in a kiln before grinding it. The latter art was but

rudely performed, and would have been difficult if the

grain had been moist and clammy. See inf. ii. 520,
seqq„ Georg. i. 267, ‘nunc torrete igni fruges, nunc
frangite saxo.' Aen. i. 178, ‘frugesque receptas Et
torrere parant flammis et frangere saxo.’ The word
frnqes, which is generally, like fractus, derived from
fruor, is perhaps connected with φρύγειν, ‘ to toast.'
Thucydides speaks of πεφρυγμένας κσιθάς, vi. 22.

698. aptior ensis] This alludes to the troubles of
the civil wars. The same comnlaint occurs in Georg. i.
507, ‘Et curvae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem.’

701. domzeitzccce] The words are addressed to Ger-
manicus, but may have been originally meant for

Augustus.
706. Ledaeis cleis] Castor and Pollux See Sueto-

nius, quoted on ver. 645. It was vowed by A. Postu-
mius, B. c. 498, in consequence of the aid rendered
by the twin deities at the battle of Lake Regillus. See
Livy, ii. 42. It stood in the Forum, connected with
the spring of Juturna (sup. 463), at which Pollux was
sabled to have watered his horse after the battle.

